All right. Okay, so as Rachel, you know, started the introduction, today we're here to talk about
a little bit of the project workflow for Exploratory Data Projects. And I actually
gave this talk originally last month with our ladies Bergen, and that was my actual first talk,
I guess I should say. So I'm sort of repeating, but with a little bit of addition from since then,
and now I found out two more packages. So I've added as in my last slide, I'm not talking about
it too much, because I didn't have enough time to, you know, explore it so much. But I guess
they look promising. And so I added the links. So you know, if you come back to these,
come back to this
deck later, which I'll be sharing with Rachel, and I think in the meetup group,
you would have access to those links. So all right, let's get it going.
So I guess to begin with about myself, I'm a data science practitioner, and I also do some side
gigs on freelancing. At this point, I currently work as a data science consultant with
OnPoint Insights. And I, you know, sort of consult a client in biomedical devices company,
leading their reporting needs from the quality and complaints side of things. I also TA for,
currently, I'm also TAing for applied linear modeling class at University of Pennsylvania
for the social sciences department. I'm an avid hour user. I always have, I guess,
two or three art projects open at one time on my laptop. And I try to be as active in
the community for our ladies and our for the years as much as possible. I started at Boston
College in the US and my prior education has been in India. And I'm also, you know,
big promoter, proponent of women in data science, analytics, and I've been ambassador of some of
these in the past few years. And then I'm ready to jump in. The big motivation for this talk
was basically came in for based on the projects that I was working on earlier this year.
And I had, I ended up with a bunch of projects on exploratory, you know, side of things,
very open ended projects, but I just had to figure out something and I didn't know what,
where to start. So as a result of which what happened was I realized after my third project
that I was doing a lot of repetitive work. And for a person like me, I tend towards automation
and hence, you know, my idea of sort of trying to streamline or automate as much as possible of my,
you know, sort of ED workflow would be. And another, I think the challenging piece of it was
that it was taking so much time for me to, you know, get the data, generate all the plots over
and over again. And I was ending up with not enough time to actually look at their outputs
and generate insights out of it, out of it to make better use of my time. And hence, I started
moving towards streamlining my thought process. And in that process, I came across lots of packages,
some of which you've already, you know, heard some of which you may not know. So let's,
let's get started. My talk would be basically divided into two parts. One being the absolute
first steps, meaning these are the packages that, you know, will follow in the next subsequent slides
would be about, you would be able to use them, or I preferred using them when I come across a
data set absolutely fresh when I don't know much about it. And I'm like absolutely literally
exploring what is there in that, you know, how many columns there is, you know, how does,
how are different unique values looking in it. And then there will be a second step of,
the second phase of this would be when, you know, we kind of have a sense of the data,
but we start to visualize it a little more specifically, you know, I want to look at unique
values and a lot more from, you know, some of the functionalities from Excel also that make
things very quicker for us. So again, coming back to the phase one or absolutely new data exploration
phase, the packages that I discovered and I want to talk about and share with everyone
is the first one being data explorer package. And what this package does is where we were
abating, it helps you with three main steps. It helps you do a lot of, it automatically does a
lot of exploratory data analysis for you. And then the results that it provides you
allow you to look into, you know, a faster, quicker feature engineering. And then overall,
it also provides you, this package also provides you with functions that you can use for data
reporting purposes. Again, that is about the low level details of what each variable in the data
is and how the bivariate and multivariate relationships exist in the dataset that you
have at hand. There are lots of functions that this package provides, but my go-to has been
create report function. And I'll do a little demo of this. And TxHousing is one of the datasets
available in ggplot2 package, which I have taken to, you know, talk about and show the example for.
The slide is also has all the links to all the packages. So the vignette for this is, this is
how it looks like. And it gives you all the details of, you know, multiple functions that it provides.
It also provides a way to replace missing values. I am probably not going to go through all the
details of this, but this is one of the very promising packages that I've seen and come across.
And I think this is really powerful. I can actually demo that first, or maybe I'll just go through the
next package as well. And I'll finish the phase one and then I'll demo the rest of the packages.
So moving on, the next package that I want to talk about is data reporter package.
It was one of the packages that I've, I heard about in a YR conference, I guess more than a
year ago. Now this package very specifically focuses or is built with the mindset of doing
quality checks on your data. It has some of the repetitive things that you would see with your
data explorer results, but I think the stronger part of it or the better focus of this package
is more on the quality of the data. So it tells you, you know, more than just missing values,
it also talks about, you know, what outliers seemingly you would see in this column in this
data set. And again, with many other functions available, if I have to just pick one function
that is helpful or that, you know, sort of brings out everything, all the essence of this package
for me is make data report package, sorry, function. And we'll go through this demo again
with the same housing data set and see, you know, what are the additional value, what is the
additional value that it brings? So again, I just reiterate that this package with some similarity
to data explorer, but also has its additional value of how it brings some of your data checks
and it helps you identify the possible errors in the existing system that you are in right now.
Moving on, I guess Skmar package is pretty famous. I would say probably more than these two
and Skmar package with again, with its only one function, that would be a Skmar skim function
that helps you look at the, you know, different values in your column. It provides you some of
the statistics with very easy to modify defaults. And one very, I guess the conspicuous difference
between all of these packages is, or the results of these report functions is that data explorer
create report, it gives you a nice HTML format response, data reporter by default provides you
with a PDF output and Skmar skim function actually, you know, throws out your results
in the console. So again, that could be another way of, you know, reason for choosing whatever
you choose for the ease of being within the system, like, you know, within your R studio
window, if that's what you would want. So I guess before we move on, I don't think I'm
sharing everything. So I'm going to share my R studio window now. Can you all see my
slides? I'm going to, I guess I will have to, sorry, I'm going to have to share everything
because I should have the results. Okay. And sorry for that. I'm going to move the
camera so you don't show.
I could see the report for a second when you pulled it up.
The PDF one. Yeah, this one has to be the HTML one.
Well, in my presentation, something always has to happen. So I can't figure out which file it was.
All right. So we should have one pretty soon. All right. So this, with just one function,
I was able to look at this, you know, let me show you this, this rich report that I get
tells me a lot about the data set that I have. And let's say I've not looked at this TX housing
at all. And it tells me how many rows it has, how many columns it has, you know, what type
data type it is, you know, what the numeric, discrete, continuous, and how many missing
values do I have. Now, after that, you know, quick table, it also tells you how many missing
values you have by percentage in each of these, you know, data sets. So how many,
in how many columns, how many observations, meaning rows, then a quick structure of how
your data looks like. Now, by each column, how many of these are, you know, what percentage of
rows in each column are missing. And it gives you a quick bar chart of that and,
you know, percentages on top of that. Again, everything in, you know, you would want to do
in univariate distribution, bivariate analysis, it also goes up to the extent of giving you
QQ plot to basically test for normality. Correlation analysis, I think a lot of times we
also, we do need these numbers. I guess I personally have not used PCA from these results,
but it goes up to that extent. So it's pretty detailed and pretty time saving, I would say at
least. One day's work for me, one day's worth of work when I would have to, I would be probably
making all of these charts and exploring, you know, every individual column within the data set.
So that's only Data Explorer. Going back to
the data reporter package. Now, this is how the output of, you know, the PDF format of this output
looks like. Again, like I said, it has some, you know, repetitions and for reasonable reasons.
So it gives you how many rows and columns you have, how many. Now, I guess this is the check
that I was talking about. So it talks about how many missing values you have, you know,
how many prefix and suffixes, whitespaces. So basically that gives you a quicker sense of,
you know, what data frame or what column you're looking at, what data types this,
you know, variable is. If you know about it, you know, you basically get a better,
you are able to quickly decide if there are any changes that you want to make.
Again, the summary table of number of unique values, missing values, and it tells you if there
are any problems, you know, one of some of these problems that have been highlighted,
including outliers and misclassified numerical integer variables,
and, you know, things like that. So that's, I think that's pretty useful and powerful.
It gives you, in a similar way, a univariate distribution here with a,
what do you say, a histogram and a little bit about the variable itself.
I think the one I do want to bring attention to is these values, which it identifies as outliers,
which may not necessarily be outliers in your data, but since it specifically highlights those
values, it gives you a sense of, you know, I'm thinking of right words. It gives you a little
idea of maybe something that you want to go back to and check. So it just sort of highlights that,
you know, it's a sign that you can go back and look at this, go back to this column and
check a little more in detail. So that's good. So, you know, a lot of these columns have
those notes on outliers here. And then, you know, rest is basically sort of your environment
information. So again, like I said, pretty useful information here.
We'll go back to the schema, schema function.
So this pretty much, I should do it this way. So this gives you a lot of information again,
some of which is repeated about how many rows and columns, how many character and numeric variables.
It also allows you groupings. In this case, it says, you know, the group variable is none here.
And I think that's one of the strongest suits of schema I find against these other two.
So now this piece is the summary statistics that I was talking about. And I think one
that I personally like a lot is this quick sort of the sparklines, but it gives you the histogram
distribution right here in front of you in the console, which is also kind of useful in,
especially, let's say, for example, in this case, as the listings and inventory column,
you can see that these are skewed and, you know, this one is uniformly distributed, which is
a good piece of information to have. And going back to the grouping piece,
you could also use, you know, your data to be, you could group it by,
let's see, what can we group here by? Maybe, let's see.
Let me do it by city or, I don't know, I want to do it by date because I want to keep it small.
And I might have to actually load the reverse first.
So you can see how quickly, again, for each year, so let's see. So group column is year. So for each
year, it is going to give you how, you know, different the summary statistic is for all the
rest of the columns, again, including all those histograms in the end. So it kind of, you know,
is another way of quickly looking at your data, especially if there are more numeric variables
than others. And now I think we're ready to, should I pause for any questions?
I do see there are two questions that came in on Slido,
and one was from Sharon. Would you want to ask that one live, Sharon?
Oh, wait, yeah. I'm unmuted. Thank you. It's the Zoom hell. I'm unmuted.
I'm just curious if you've tried these summary reports on very large datasets,
and if so, how that works. It looks really interesting, but, you know, if you've got
something with like a million rows, is it not reasonable? Yeah, I wouldn't say it's not
reasonable, but yes, I would agree that it would take relatively longer time. And I have
personally experienced that with Data Reporter. I think when I tried it was with a sort of million,
you know, with a dataset of sort of that tune that you're asking. And Data Reporter,
because of, I think, what goes in the background, it is generally slower than Data Explorer or
schema package. It honestly might even take like five to ten minutes, but with Data Explorer,
that would be relatively faster, like maybe under one minute or so. That's my experience.
Thank you. Yeah, but yeah, with Data Reporter, I remember how excited I was to share those
results with my team. It was worth it, I guess, even if, you know, I just ran it and maybe went
to get a coffee. But yeah, that's so. Priyanka, I have a question. DP here. So usually we do,
after the univariate analysis, like we do the bivariate analysis as well, which like even in
the trivariate, like sometimes we do it. Yeah. So because I'm actually, you know, the beginner in
this, in this, but I use the Python and all those tools. I don't know like what this tool is
basically. Number one is about that one, if you can share the information. Second one is when we
go to the deep level, like we need to group certain things and then do some aggregate functions on top
of it. Like, so like this, the Data Explorer, like whatever they report, you just show up,
which is said, look, it's going to, you know, save us a day. So such kind of things can be
added into this one or like for that one, we have to do it, you know, our programming or something
like that. Can you repeat your question? I'm not sure I'm getting a hundred percent of that.
Okay. So you, you pulled out a report and that report was pretty much like what by default,
like report came up there, but sometimes we have to do the like grouping, grouping, grouping and
yeah, that, that pretty much this report. Yeah. So I'm talking about the next step,
like around the bivariate analysis of the tribe. So when we group the values and then we put some
aggregate functions, so such kind of things like are also supported by this tool or for that one,
we need to do some programming. So I guess all of this is, you know, in a way our programming,
either within the package or you would be writing it. But I guess to answer your question,
so this, you know, the result that you're seeing right now is just from one function, which again,
you know, is in a way coding, you would install the data explorer package, and then you would
write, you would some, some way, you know, also write another, I guess, a function, you know,
read CSV or some other way of reading your data. And then you would use the create report
function from data explorer package to run on this data set. Now, if you specifically look at
the groupings, I would say, I think what you, what you can do is like I was mentioning earlier,
now, if you look at these vignette of data explorer package, it also provides you
with the smaller functions that are giving these results in this one. So, you know,
if you look at all these graphs, right, they are driven by some other function,
they're most of all of this is, let me put it this way. Okay, let me let me change the question
different way. So this is like the pretty basic stuff, which it has done, like, okay, getting the
columns information, like putting the charts based on the column based on data missing and all that
stuff. That's the first stage, which you said. So let me put it this way. For example, if you
in our the, in our, I mean, commonly used data, data sets, which we have the Texas, let's say,
and I want to find out like, which, which, you know, the, like the owners properties are highly
listed there. And I figured out like the 1010 out of them. Now I want to like to create a subset of
10, which is pretty much on the grouping of that one. Okay, hey, for these, make a group of certain
items, which will help me to lead to the decision that why they are basically the top 10. You know,
the owners who their properties are highly listed there. So now, what I'm saying is,
we need to group them, we need to find out, okay, what aggregate functions need to be used.
So such kind of things. Likewise, this single statement does exist there are not there.
This was my question.
Priyanka, I think Priyanka was covering that when she was going into the individual functions that
were part of this, but I know a few other people were recommending some other packages that you
might want to might want to check out as well. Like Eric mentioned the point blank package,
if you want to do a lot of customization. I know we're in the middle of the still in the
middle of the presentation here. So it might be good to save this question.
Yeah, I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I didn't mean to. I'm first time.
No, no worries. I could tell you're excited about it.
I thought of like, okay, my problem like gotten getting sorted out within a minute.
So I got too excited. I'm sorry.
No worries at all. We'll definitely have more time for questions.
Right. And it's always, you know, an iterative process, you do something and then you find
something interesting or, you know, not so encouraging. Then you try to poke around,
you filter your data to see what is exactly going on in these 10 listings. And then, you know,
sort of try to find more. So, yeah, you've got sort of keep keep going into specifics.
I guess that's how I appreciate that. Thank you.
There's one more question from you.
So you're asking the explore this data explorer, like, is it available for the Python library as
well? I think you're working on an R package. Yeah, it's an R package.
It's only R package.
I see Mio had asked one other question, adding a follow up on Sharon's question.
Do you or anybody on the call have advice for EDA with big data with hundreds or thousands
of predictor columns? Yeah, and I guess the question more is on he or she has had more
challenges loading this data, which is this large. I guess I'm not an expert, but I've heard room
and arrow packages might be helpful with this. But I guess it's it's not in the scope of what
we're discussing. So I hope it's OK if I move on.
Definitely, I can share those links to those packages, too, in the chat while you continue.
Thank you, Frank. So, all right. So moving on to, you know, after after doing a lot of
interesting exploration with different kinds of quality checks and, you know, individual level
details of what your data looks like now, you know, now is when your actual work starts and
you want to see a lot more. You want to get in more depth of the data that you have.
So now on that note, I figured I found useful these following packages where our pivot table
is some is a synonymous to, you know, Microsoft Excel pivot table, which I'm sure a lot of us
have used before we moved on to, you know, before we moved on to our journey.
And I personally found it very useful because I was working with a lot of user level data,
but it was in, you know, in terms of their daily activity on the app and which meant
that the data set that I have, it's good. So for each user, I had multiple records and
every time I did some filtering or, you know, any sort of transformation or wrangling of my data,
I always from the QA perspective, I've always wanted to see how many users did I lose out,
you know, in this funnel or in this analysis chain. So, you know, I always was looking at,
you know, looking at the unique number of users. So instead of having to do,
you know, select user ID distinct, and then, you know, give me that count of the final number,
you know, I sort of had created this little chain of my diverse code. But again, you know,
having to do copy paste that again and again, I figured this package was what solved my problem.
And then again, we'll move on to this quiz and chronicle as well.
So now within this package, when I look at it, I sort of, you know, I created these
little notes here on how do I find this useful. So it allows me to do a lot of quick and dirty
exploration, like I was saying. So every time I would filter the data, I would pipe in our
pivot table function in it. And then, you know, from that point onwards, whatever the state of
my data is at this point, whether it's at the granular level, whether it has been grouped or
whatnot, I could always, you know, just pick and choose things I wanted to look at, you know,
what are the unique number of users I have or per user level, how many records am I looking at
at this point in terms of their activity and things like that. So from the demo purposes,
let's go to the workflow here. All right, so I am going to be looking at, yeah.
So the demo here is about this.
So again, back to the Tx housing data, you can see that it brings you pretty much the same
setup as a, you know, Excel pivot table. It allows it, you know, on the slide first, it gives me
the count of the entire number of rows, which is a default, right? But I can always look at
count of unique values by which column. In this case, I want to look at how many unique cities
do I have. In my case, I would go back and look at the user IDs. We could look at how many years
data are we looking at in this case. So he has 16 years of data in this Tx housing, which is great.
We could go back and say, you know, just quickly to the sum of the sales values,
like how much money are we talking about here? I could spread this by years. I could
break it up by cities and years and, you know, all those things. So again, this is pretty simple.
And I have not even bothered to actually look if there are any more functions within this package,
because in this use case that I have in the situation that I was in, you know, being able
to do this just quickly and see, oh, okay, this looks very small. This looks very high.
You know, so based on that, and, you know, maybe this is a specific
area of issue that I want to focus on. And that's all I needed to know in the exploratory process
that I was in. And when I come across these things, you know, I will make a quick note of
what I'm observing, and then I move on to doing the next step of things. And I think one thing
that I sort of want to bring in is the reason why I'm talking about all of these packages or,
you know, different iterations in using these is that when you talk of an exploratory project,
you basically don't always need everything for your stakeholders or for your final outputs in
your final presentations when you're working on them. And hence, I feel that even though I am,
you know, very much an automation person and, you know, pro-code, but I have started to appreciate
that not all the time I need to create all the code. I don't need to always, you know, have a
ggplot2 code to be able to have a look at that final output. And hence, you know, these quick
analyses, they help me a lot move faster in terms of what I'm trying to achieve.
Going back to this discussion, I guess, in terms of sort of wrapping up this package and this
function, I just want to talk about some benefits and limitations that I've found.
So, as I just demoed, you can see that, you know, you can not just the counts, but you can
sort of do any sort of aggregation, pretty much everything that you would do with a pivot table
within your, you know, staying within your R ecosystem, within your R studio. And especially
if your data set is bigger, it proves to be much more useful than actually moving into an Excel
and doing those pivot values and letting your Excel hang. That will not be a situation here
with our pivot table function. And I think what I find really useful is that it's pipeable.
So, you know, you can have your data at any stage, like I was mentioning earlier, and
you could still look at different sort of summary statistics with your data.
I guess limitation, probably not is, you know, in this case is that you don't get a code
generated out of, you know, any analysis that you will do here. Like I was, you know, I was
looking at unique numbers. I was looking at maybe some form of aggregate. At that point, I am
looking at it, but as a result, I'm only seeing the actual outputs or the changes that are
happening. It will not automatically generate the code in the backend for me, which is actually
fine for the purpose that it is solving for me. And I think the bigger reason why I have this
no code as a limitation here, because when we talk about SQSA, I guess then it'll make it more
clearer. And then, you know, it's very plain and simple. It doesn't have too much of colors, which
is again, also not a big deal, but just to sort of, you know, bring in that it's not too fancy
as such. So should I pause for any questions before I move to the next package?
We can hold some of them till the end as well. But just a reminder that people can use Slido as
well if you want to ask any anonymous questions too. All right. So great. Moving on to SQSA,
which is, I kind of really like this package. And I think, I know, I think this was the first
package that we first, like earlier talked about, you know, in our previous conversations about,
oh, can I give a lightning talk? It was years ago. But yeah, so this package really allows you
a very quick exploration in a visual manner, which I think is what people would be able to
appreciate. It is basically a package that runs your, a lot of, it basically still, you know,
generates ggplot2 packages, but with the user level of interaction, a UI kind of Tableau kind
of platform for people, it also allows you to do a lot of data wrangling on the go. And I will show
you how, what I'm, you know, meaning by that. And it also does the code generation, which was the
previous limitation I was mentioning. And let's do a quick demo of that to see what I just said,
like what, what it really means when, when I said these things, what it allows to do.
And I think one good thing to know, one thing to know is that when you run this SQSA package
function, it actually brings up Shiny app for you. But yeah, it's, it's fun.
So I'm going to go ahead and do this.
So when, once that, you know, Shiny app opens up, it gives you,
oh, I don't have any data frames right now. All right, one second. I had to close this first.
Okay, good. So let's run this again.
Oh, great. So now I'm bringing up the TX housing again. When, when you bring this up for the first
time, it will always ask you to, you know, share or pick, select which data frame you want to work
with. You can change the environment. You can actually also get the data from Google sheets
and some external files. But I guess personally, I've just mostly used something from my environment.
So we go ahead and you say import data. And then this, this is sort of a quick
Tableau style visual that appears for you, the UI that comes for you. It allows you to, you know,
it basically brings all the columns from your data set here. It allows you to, you know, make
different charts and plots. As you can see, it gives you all the defaults of, or all the options
that you normally get in a ggplot. Because like I said, this actually runs a ggplot2 in the
background for you. So let's see. Let me just drag in the sales column. So what it will do is it
also gives you a little warning of, you know, things that you have missed out. So for the
missing values that have been removed, which every ggplot2 also warns you in general. So now what
this does is by default, since it was a numeric variable, it actually plotted a histogram of this
data, this entire column, you could choose to change things, then in certain cases, you may
not be able to, you know, some of the plots will not be highlighted if that data type does not
support it. But otherwise, you know, it basically brings up the limited functionality of the plots
that it can make for you. Here again, now, if I wanted to make this while in chart by, I want to
stay here. So it is going to now make, it changed the plot by default, but you know, you get the
idea that you basically can play around with a lot of these things on the fly and on the go. So
a couple of other things that I want to talk about is it gives you all the, you know, like even,
you know, beautification options, I do all the theme and the filtering options that you
generally would write to get to your final code. I think most of that is sort of also covered in
these options here. So you can change your X label, Y label, you can change the caption and
title of your chart. So for example, let me see a scatter plot here, and you would see that appear,
right. And then within the plot options, you can choose to vary things here, then, you know,
all those things that you get, that you would always use as a layer in your ggplot2 command,
or, you know, your ggplot2 code, you can change the transformation. This is the start piece of it
for the X variable, for Y variable, and things like that. You can flip the coordinate if you
would want. And there's an option to add smooth line. And again, there are generally, you would
have some more, something could be different when you change your plot type and things like that.
For the appearance perspective, you could change things that, you know, how you want it to look
like. Again, here, you know, I think this is what I was saying, from the wrangling perspective,
you can just by quickly selecting these values, or, you know, maybe deselecting values from
this categorical variable, you can do all that filtering of your data, like you can say,
is not is.na is what you want. So all of these things, you know, make it so easy and so quick
for you in terms of getting the kind of output that you're looking for. And then the magic part
of it is, you get all the code on based on what you did here, which you could just click here to
insert it in the script right away, or you could copy in the clipboard and go back to your code
and write it. So that's why I guess this is one of my favorite packages, which allows you to,
you know, play around with things. But yes, I guess the challenge with this is that as your
data gets bigger and bigger, I guess with a million rows, this starts to lose weight, or,
you know, it starts to hang and take much longer. But in general, I guess, when working with that
big data, what I have, what I've always been suggested by my bosses is that, you know, start
with a smaller subset, and, you know, then play around with things. If something seems useful,
then, you know, you can take the code from this and then maybe run it with a bigger data set
in, you know, in the next section or next code chunk. But still, I still feel that, you know,
even if your data is too big, there is definitely a lot of value in using this, and, you know, sort
of saving time. Another option that this gives you is, I think something I missed earlier was, let's
see. All right. So, since I am not able to look at the data, let's see.
It also allows you to, you know, look at your data, like, just to sort of get a sense of is
everything imported correctly or not, or something as just to make sure that what you are expecting
is actually what it is. And on that note, it also allows you to, you know, sort of course your
values. So, either you can do it here, you know, maybe if this is an integer, but you want to make
it a factor, you can do that. It also allows you, I think, okay, maybe this version has changed, but
I guess I've seen that earlier, the coursing option to come in here. But at this point, you
can actually do those things here. It also gives you a little quick summary of your data. Then you
say apply changes, and then, you know, you can go ahead and you go back to this background screen
and have fun with the data. Okay. Now, for respecting everybody's time, I'm going to just
quickly jump into the next one and try and talk less. Just running through the benefits and
limitations, like I was mentioning, it allows you to, it sort of saves you a lot more time in,
it allows you to do exploration as well as generates code for you when you choose to say,
okay, this is the one, you know, you tried five things, you didn't like all of them, you said,
okay, this last one is what I like, and this is what I'm going to keep. Now, after that,
after you've chosen to keep this, you know, you don't have to again go back to try and figure out
how you got to that. It gives you a code that you can just quickly as it is take and move on.
It does not provide you a lot of options of summaries as the previous packages that we've
talked about. And hence, that's why I see that, you know, using all of these in conjunction,
using the package or the function for what it is, you know, more useful for would save you
some energy and time. And like I was saying, so, with respect to the plot options, also,
there are the ones that you see. So, it is limited in capacity in that sense. But again, I think
that's pretty, still pretty powerful. It gives you a lot to do as against, you know, it's half full,
not half, like, I don't know what I'm saying, but I guess I'm looking at the positive side of what
it allows you to do. And then, the final one is the chronicle package. It is a package that
allows you to do quick exploration and report generation. Words wise, I guess a lot of what
I've already said, but to demo it, what it does is it provides you with a lot of add underscore
functions and it provides you with render report function and report columns. You know, I've given
a summary of this, what these two functions basically are similar to. And then, add functions
are actually wrapper to make functions, which is how, this is how it looks like. So, again,
even with chronicle, you know, visuals that you're going to be looking at, you still have ggplot2
under the hood. The function that you would write would be a make underscore, for example,
bar plot or a line plot and things like that. But what goes under the hood, you know, is really
a bar plot function is being defined with lots of these, what do you say, customizations,
which you can actually pass on here. So, it's just a way of wrapping, you know, creating a bar plot
with the layer style to, you know, these options that you can mention within your one function call.
So, in a way, it makes it shorter or quicker to get to those final outputs that you're looking at,
which, again, like I was mentioning earlier, it's really a situation, depends on use case where
a ggplot2 code would be better or a chronicle code would, you know, using a function from
chronicle would make you do things faster. And then it reduces the time to generate plots
is what I was trying to mention, because it's still a code, but it kind of, you know,
brings it all together and it tells you, like, you know, you don't have to look for what was my
continuous scale option or, you know, what other theme options that I was trying to look at. So,
you have all those options within your function call and you can choose to,
you know, change or not change any of those specifics. So, let's jump on to look at a demo
for that. Okay, actually, I don't think I have a demo for that. I do, I do. So, this is how
a chronicle, you know, functions look like. So, for example, if I'm creating a report,
I could use add underscore text function. I could add a table and a rain cloud and a scatter plot.
Now, and then you're basically just piping what all functions you want instead of, you know,
plus layer, adding the layer using a plus operator in your ggplot. So, this is, you know, to me,
it's much more stronger and powerful in that sense that, you know, now at this point,
you can have tables and charts and everything all, you know, in a singular report. And then,
like I was mentioning earlier, the render report function, it allows you to use more than one,
generate more than one output formats. And you could give some titles, you could add
some more fancy customizations, you know, in a markdown format and things like that.
And I'm going to try and see if I can get the demo. Yes. So, this is how the output of the
chronicle demo looks like on this data set. So, this is on Iris. I guess I didn't get to
change a lot on this. So, what you're looking at is all the add underscore functions that we used.
First, we looked at, we added the text of, which is the title. Then we added the table of, you
know, what we are looking at. This is just the height of the actual data set, which we wanted
to look at. And, you know, the title, this is how it looks like. So, that piece is just, you know,
you added by, you just had to add this much section to get that nice table in your report.
Then you were adding a rain cloud plot, which I think is the most important for me.
Because I have personally struggled a lot with creating a rain cloud plot. So, this was so
simple for me. And I guess this was my one most important, if nothing at all, I think this is my
go-to, why I would use this package. So, you know, it gives me that ease of doing lots of stuff.
And then, you know, we added a scatter plot. And then this report basically just has that,
whatever you needed to do with it. You can, I mentioned the groups, you can mention what your
X and Y are going to be. And then, so all of these is generated in, you know, this is an object that
I created with all of this, piped together. And then I say, give me this as a report format. I
want PDF and I want RMVF formats. And this is one of the PDF format outputs that I'm showing you.
So, yeah, I guess that's pretty much about it. And these are some of the resources, links that
I've used, I guess, pretty much some of these things that I'd opened and showed you in between.
The bonus was these two packages that I also come across since I actually did this last presentation
last month. And between yesterday, I saw that there is another package, which is pretty strong
in terms of, again, I think this also uses a Shiny app in the process. It's a Dlooker package
and a Descriptar package. I think Descriptar was shared by Indrajit Patil, so I should give
this credit to him. It came on my LinkedIn feed. And yeah, with that, I think I'm good. And that's
all I wanted to share with all of you. That was awesome, Priyanka. Thank you so much.
It's crazy how many packages there are, and to keep up to date on all of them is almost impossible.
Thank you. I see there are a few other questions, and I'll let Rajit ask the question on Slido.
Could I pass the mic over to you to have you ask that? Yeah, thanks. Thank you, Priyanka. It was
really a wonderful session, especially the SPZ package that I feel it will be really helpful for
me in my EDA exploration. So I had just one small query. When you do this EDA on these various data
sets, is there any particular package or choice of packages which is more suited for text-heavy
data exploration, like data sets which is having more columns or values which are having more
characters rather than numerics? For example, I use a skimmer a lot, but that's what I have
observed. It's very good, obviously, if there are more numeric variables. But when it comes with
text or character-heavy data sets, it's a struggle for me. So based on this list of
packages that I've talked about, I would say potentially Data Explorer would be good because
then it will throw out, like with the create report, it will throw out all the bar charts with
the percentage or the number of records that you have for each of those categories
within that variable. So for example, a month column has January, February, March. So it'll
throw out what you see, how much of your data is that you see in each month. For example,
if there's a category where it is slim, I guess I don't want to take this question. If it's a
gender, male, female, you would know how the things are distributed within that. So I guess
that would be one. And otherwise, it could be our pivot table that could be useful in the way I see
it. Yeah, I think our pivot table, yeah, that one was really fantastic. Yes. Thanks. Thanks,
Priyanka. Thanks. Thank you. And I see Matthew had just asked, are you able to share the sample
code with us as well in the presentation? So a prior version of this and most of the report
samples that I talked about, they're already on my GitHub. But I will be uploading this
this one that, you know, the slide that I've shared today, the one I was talking through
also on my GitHub, and then I'll share the link with Rachel. And I guess she'll be sharing.
Perfect. So I will, I'll share the Zoom recording link on the meetup page. And then I'll put your
the link to your slides and GitHub there as well. Perfect. Perfect. I'm just going to do a quick
check here. And I want to see if there are any questions we missed from earlier. I see
a lot of people are saying thank you so much, Priyanka. That was awesome.
But feel free to unmute yourself if there's a question that I've missed.
Hi, Priyanka. I'll be back again. So by any chance, by any chance, if you like come across like
these similar packages for Python, I know pretty much sure like there will be a lot of them.
I think probably there is a parallel for Data Explorer like with the same name for Python.
And you'd be like, I think you'll be really excited to know there is a LUX package that
I recently attended like a data umbrella session that I attended and LUX package
in the Python ecosystem is amazing. It seemed very promising. And I was like, oh my god,
why don't we have it in our LUX? It's you should explore that. It's very it's I guess a step
forward from things that we've talked about today. It adds a lot of, I guess, intuition behind,
you know, what you've done and the data that it sees, and then it gives you
options to do next. So it's really powerful. Got it. And this ggplot is like also I think
yes, because I never use it. I never use it. Or is it on the R package?
It's an R package. ggplot2 is an R package which you use for data visualization. So it
goes to this theory of grammar of graphics and it's a layered approach where you basically
write first ggplot2 function and then you use a plus operator to add more specific customizations
to that code. So if you remember seeing this piece here, this portion of the code,
it's not too big, but I'm hoping if you can see this plus operator. So you basically,
you know, start with the ggplot2 function, then you keep adding what kind of plot you want,
and then, you know, specific details about how your visual should look like. So theme
allows you to change how the text should look like, how the, you know, the color in the background
and the grid lines and whatnot can be changed. And then scale, continuous, and fill manual. These,
again, these are how your axes would change. Got it. Yeah, because I'm actually not into R. So
R side is like only Python is available. So I was just thinking like if any of these packages
are available. But anyways, I got the terminologies, I got the names, I will try to
find out the similar packages, which can do the job in Python. But I'm just saying, okay,
just in case if you have a, you know, you know, you get come across by any means. So just share
it with us. Thank you. But I appreciate that this was really, you know, good session, honestly.
Thank you. Thank you so much. And I'm not sure if anyone has experience with this as well,
but using R packages from Python as well, like I know, in R, you can do that in R.
Yeah, like you can. But I meant like the other way around. Yeah, yeah.
Brian, do you do you know if you could do that? Because I know you use
like you use the other way like with reticulate and R Markdown and Python.
But from Python, could you use R packages?
There is a program, oops. Yep. I'm sorry. No, go ahead, Matt.
There is a program, it's alluding me, the name is alluding me right now. But actually,
it uses ggplot for Python. So if I think of it in the next minute or two, I'll put it up there.
There's something I think called the Py2R or something along those lines that allows you to
use it's almost like the reverse of reticulate. Yeah. But I don't think it's nearly as good.
I was trying to Google it real quickly, but I wasn't sure what it was called.
Yeah, I don't know. I've heard about this core2 platform, which is similar to RStudio,
but I haven't looked too much into it.
There it is, Rpy2. I was close. I had R2 and Py, just not in the right order.
But I would, if you want to mix and match, I would stick with reticulate and Markdown. In fact,
I just thought I think I'll actually do a demo for lightning talk on doing some pretty advanced
reticulate with R Markdown and doing web apps with it for that next chat.
That'd be great. I did just put that in the chat as well, that in January,
we will have a series of lightning talks as well. So if there's something that you maybe want to do
a five minute talk on, maybe a new package or something that you just learned, you can
fill out that speaker submission form there. It's always fun to see all the new things that
the people are learning and all these packages. Thank you so much, Priyanka. That was amazing.
Really appreciate your time. And thank you all so much for joining. I'll do one last check to
see if there are any other questions that I missed too. Plot nine, that's it. Plot nine
uses ggplot4 Python. Oh, interesting. Awesome. Thank you. I appreciate that.
Perfect. That's it. Sorry, guys. I have to just step out for another meeting. Bye-bye.
Thank you. Thank you all so much. Have a great rest of the day. Bye. Thank you so much, everyone,
for coming in. I hope everybody gained something or the other. I learned a lot in the process. So
I appreciate this opportunity.